Code Book
================

Getting And Cleaning Data - Final Project
-----------------------------------------

This is a code book describing the various files in this project, and documenting the format of averages.txt

### Files

-   runAnalysis.R - contains the logic for generating the tidy data from the data set.
-   general.R - some utility functions for using popd/pushd to enter/leave directories in a shell-like manner
-   averages.txt - file generated by runAnalysis which contains the tidy data result. See the section below for details.
-   README.rmd - this file, used to generate the README.md and run the runAnalysis.R script.

### Running

Simply extract the [UCI HAR Dataset](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones) into the working directory, install:

-   rmarkdown
-   data.tables
-   dplyr

And knit the README.rmd file.

Code Book
---------

### Activites

    ## WALKING 
    ## WALKING_UPSTAIRS 
    ## WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS 
    ## SITTING 
    ## STANDING 
    ## LAYING 

### Outputs

The output file (averages.txt) represents a summary of all subject/activity pairs, and their averages for various measurements which were taken. There are Gyroscope and Accelerometer readings with various levels of integration/derivation, e.g. for calculating Jerk, Acceleration, mean, standard deviation. Each of these readings has been averaged and put into the output file.

For example, Subject 3 has his WALKING activity summarized for the average of all his walking data.

The data is in a file called averages.txt with the following columns:

    ## 1 Activity 
    ## 2 Subject 
    ## 3 tBodyAcc.mean...X 
    ## 4 tBodyAcc.mean...Y 
    ## 5 tBodyAcc.mean...Z 
    ## 6 tBodyAcc.std...X 
    ## 7 tBodyAcc.std...Y 
    ## 8 tBodyAcc.std...Z 
    ## 9 tGravityAcc.mean...X 
    ## 10 tGravityAcc.mean...Y 
    ## 11 tGravityAcc.mean...Z 
    ## 12 tGravityAcc.std...X 
    ## 13 tGravityAcc.std...Y 
    ## 14 tGravityAcc.std...Z 
    ## 15 tBodyAccJerk.mean...X 
    ## 16 tBodyAccJerk.mean...Y 
    ## 17 tBodyAccJerk.mean...Z 
    ## 18 tBodyAccJerk.std...X 
    ## 19 tBodyAccJerk.std...Y 
    ## 20 tBodyAccJerk.std...Z 
    ## 21 tBodyGyro.mean...X 
    ## 22 tBodyGyro.mean...Y 
    ## 23 tBodyGyro.mean...Z 
    ## 24 tBodyGyro.std...X 
    ## 25 tBodyGyro.std...Y 
    ## 26 tBodyGyro.std...Z 
    ## 27 tBodyGyroJerk.mean...X 
    ## 28 tBodyGyroJerk.mean...Y 
    ## 29 tBodyGyroJerk.mean...Z 
    ## 30 tBodyGyroJerk.std...X 
    ## 31 tBodyGyroJerk.std...Y 
    ## 32 tBodyGyroJerk.std...Z 
    ## 33 tBodyAccMag.mean.. 
    ## 34 tBodyAccMag.std.. 
    ## 35 tGravityAccMag.mean.. 
    ## 36 tGravityAccMag.std.. 
    ## 37 tBodyAccJerkMag.mean.. 
    ## 38 tBodyAccJerkMag.std.. 
    ## 39 tBodyGyroMag.mean.. 
    ## 40 tBodyGyroMag.std.. 
    ## 41 tBodyGyroJerkMag.mean.. 
    ## 42 tBodyGyroJerkMag.std.. 
    ## 43 fBodyAcc.mean...X 
    ## 44 fBodyAcc.mean...Y 
    ## 45 fBodyAcc.mean...Z 
    ## 46 fBodyAcc.std...X 
    ## 47 fBodyAcc.std...Y 
    ## 48 fBodyAcc.std...Z 
    ## 49 fBodyAcc.meanFreq...X 
    ## 50 fBodyAcc.meanFreq...Y 
    ## 51 fBodyAcc.meanFreq...Z 
    ## 52 fBodyAccJerk.mean...X 
    ## 53 fBodyAccJerk.mean...Y 
    ## 54 fBodyAccJerk.mean...Z 
    ## 55 fBodyAccJerk.std...X 
    ## 56 fBodyAccJerk.std...Y 
    ## 57 fBodyAccJerk.std...Z 
    ## 58 fBodyAccJerk.meanFreq...X 
    ## 59 fBodyAccJerk.meanFreq...Y 
    ## 60 fBodyAccJerk.meanFreq...Z 
    ## 61 fBodyGyro.mean...X 
    ## 62 fBodyGyro.mean...Y 
    ## 63 fBodyGyro.mean...Z 
    ## 64 fBodyGyro.std...X 
    ## 65 fBodyGyro.std...Y 
    ## 66 fBodyGyro.std...Z 
    ## 67 fBodyGyro.meanFreq...X 
    ## 68 fBodyGyro.meanFreq...Y 
    ## 69 fBodyGyro.meanFreq...Z 
    ## 70 fBodyAccMag.mean.. 
    ## 71 fBodyAccMag.std.. 
    ## 72 fBodyAccMag.meanFreq.. 
    ## 73 fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.mean.. 
    ## 74 fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.std.. 
    ## 75 fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.meanFreq.. 
    ## 76 fBodyBodyGyroMag.mean.. 
    ## 77 fBodyBodyGyroMag.std.. 
    ## 78 fBodyBodyGyroMag.meanFreq.. 
    ## 79 fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.mean.. 
    ## 80 fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.std.. 
    ## 81 fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.meanFreq.. 

In the above table, all values *except* Activity and Subject are the aggregate mean of their values in the merged test/training sets.

Original Code Book
------------------

The original data information is as follows (taken from the UCI HAR Dataset README.txt):

Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset Version 1.0

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto. Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova. Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy. <activityrecognition@smartlab.ws> www.smartlab.ws

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING\_UPSTAIRS, WALKING\_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features\_info.txt' for more details.

### For each record it is provided:

-   Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
-   Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope.
-   A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables.
-   Its activity label.
-   An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.

### The dataset includes the following files:

-   'README.txt'

-   'features\_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.

-   'features.txt': List of all features.

-   'activity\_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.

-   'train/X\_train.txt': Training set.

-   'train/y\_train.txt': Training labels.

-   'test/X\_test.txt': Test set.

-   'test/y\_test.txt': Test labels.

The following files are available for the train and test data. Their descriptions are equivalent.

-   'train/subject\_train.txt': Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30.

-   'train/Inertial Signals/total\_acc\_x\_train.txt': The acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer X axis in standard gravity units 'g'. Every row shows a 128 element vector. The same description applies for the 'total\_acc\_x\_train.txt' and 'total\_acc\_z\_train.txt' files for the Y and Z axis.

-   'train/Inertial Signals/body\_acc\_x\_train.txt': The body acceleration signal obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration.

-   'train/Inertial Signals/body\_gyro\_x\_train.txt': The angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope for each window sample. The units are radians/second.

Notes:

-   Features are normalized and bounded within \[-1,1\].
-   Each feature vector is a row on the text file.

For more information about this dataset contact: <activityrecognition@smartlab.ws>

License:

Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication \[1\]

\[1\] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.
